Neue Haas Grotesk was created in 1957, and is the original iteration of the digital typeface Helvetica. It was created for handset metal type. Neue Haas Grotesk was an instant success in its homeland of Switzerland, commissioned by the Haas type foundry and designed by Max Miedinger. In order to make it internationally competitive, it was made available for Linotype machines in 1959 and renamed to Helvetica, which means "Swiss" in Latin, paying homage to its roots. As it transitioned to the current iteration of Helvetica, some of the personality of Neue Haas Grotesk was lost, and in 2004, Christian Schwartz was commissioned to restore the details of its original look. The project took close to 10 years, but recreated the typeface with a high level of accuracy to Miedinger's design.

Helvetica became the new name for the typeface in 1960, and the name is derived from the Celtic group known as the Helvetii/Helvetians that occupied the Swiss plateau, which was called Helvetia. Helvetica became the foremost sans-serif typeface in New York in 1965, pushing out Akzidenz-Grotesk. This was thanks to marketing from Amsterdam Continental, a European typeface importer, focusing its efforts on Helvetica. From the 1970s to 1980s, Linotype licensed Helvetica to a number of major American companies including Xerox, Adobe, and Apple. It is now one of the most widely used sans-serif typefaces, with versions in numerous languages, including some without Latin characters. Helvetica is commonly used in the transportation sector, especially metropolitan transportation. It is also used for government documents, branding, or warnings in the US, UK, EU, and formerly in parts of Asia.
